Updated: 2007Mar21
2007Mar07

From: Winged <winged@sourceforge.net>
To: All fbmuck admins
Re: Compression and 8-bit

First, hi.  I'm about to annoy you a bit, and I'm very sorry.  However, I
hope that you will bear with me as fbmuck goes through some growing pains.
I am striving to minimize them to the best of my ability, but these things
will unfortunately happen as we bring fbmuck to a more modern decade.

We are removing database compression from the main executable.  Older
versions of the database will load properly without any problems if they
are not compressed; however, if it is compressed (the default with fbmuck
versions 6.05 and prior), it must be run through fb-olddecompress first.

The reason for this incompatible change is for something very, very
important that we've ignored for the past decade or so: our European
users, including Sociopolitical Ramifications and all European players
who actually use those odd things called "grave accents" and "umlauts".
The compression code made it impossible to use 8-bit characters, and we
have finally decided to fix it.  However, there are a couple of
implementation details:

1) The locale supported for 8-bit ASCII is ISO-8859-1.
2) Character 255, named 'yuml' or 'y umlaut', is not supported.  (This is due
   to the telnet protocol using that character for its IAC escape.)
3) Player names cannot contain 8-bit characters.
4) Object names SHOULD NOT contain 8-bit characters, though we're making that
   a pair of tunable parameters.  (Basically, anything that can annoy a player
   must be able to be referenced for sweeping or otherwise getting rid of.
   Clients that can't send 8-bit characters can't reference them in object
   names.)
5) Due to the differences in object naming policy, we have introduced
   a new MUF primitive: EXT-NAME-OK? ( {s|d} s -- i )  This takes either
   a dbref (for an already-created object) or a string specifying the type
   of object, and the proposed name for it.  It returns 1 if the proposed
   name is okay for that object/type of object, or 0 if it is not.
6) There is no support for "lowercase y umlaut", or "yuml" (code 0xff), due
   to the overloading and lack of sensible compatibility with telnet's IAC
   protocol.

This is basically a stopgap measure until we get Unicode support (though the
semantics of EXT-NAME-OK? will not change).  Once that happens, we will
provide a conversion script to convert high-ASCII characters to their
equivalent Unicode codepoints -- but only for ISO-8859-1.

Thank you for being tolerant of these changes.  If you have any questions,
please submit a support request at http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/fbmuck/
and we'll get back with you -- or, if you can connect to FurryMUCK, at least
one of the developers (Winged) answers questions on the fb6 scream channel.

Sincerely,

Winged, March 7 2007
Winged, March 21 2007
